---
title: Node.js NPM
author: ancientlives
layout: library-article-vertical

categories:
- library
- notes

tags: library notes dev javascript node
year: 2015
month: 06
day: 13
published: true
summary: a brief introduction to node package manager, NPM
menu: node-intro
---

A quick introduction to the node package manager (npm) for the [node.js](https://nodejs.org) JavaScript library.

***

Contents |
-------------------------|
[Intro](#intro) |
Installing |
&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;[npm](#npm) |
&nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;[modules](#modules) |
[Importing modules](#import) |
[Find modules](#find) |
[Find module documentation](#docs) |
[View module bugs](#bugs) |
[Edit module source](#source) |
[Specifying dependencies](#depend) |

***

<a id="intro"></a>
##### Intro
**npm** is a package manager for the node.js JavaScript library. Developers can easily use **npm** to share and reuse modules in node.js applications. **npm** can also be used to share complete node.js applications. Example modules might include,

* Markup, YAML etc parsers
* database connectors

and many more.

<a id="npm"></a>
##### Installing - npm
**npm** is included with the default installers available at the [node.js](https://nodejs.org) website. For further information, and other install options, please consult the [npmjs](https://www.npmjs.com) website.

To test whether **npm** is installed, simply issue the following command 

`npm`

This should output some helpful information if **npm** is currently installed.

**NB:** on a Unix system, such as OS X or Linux, it is best to avoid installing **npm** with `sudo` privileges.

<a id="modules"></a>
##### Installing - modules
To install existing **npm** modules, use the following type of command

`npm install express`

This will install the module named `express` in the current directory. It will act as a local installation within the current directory, installing in a folder called `node_modules`. This is the default behaviour for current installs.

However, we can also specify a global install for modules. For example, we may wish to install the **express** module with global scope

`npm install -g express`

The `-g` flag specifies the required global install.

<a id="import"></a>
##### Importing modules
To import modules in our node.js code we can use the following,

```
var module = require('express');
```

When we run this application, it will look for the required module library and its source code.

<a id="find"></a>
##### Find modules
The official online search tool for **npm** can be found at [npmjs](https://www.npmjs.com/). Top packages include options such as

* browserify
* express
* grunt
* bower
* karma

and many more...

We can also search for node modules directly from the terminal using the following command,

`npm search express`

This will return results for module names and descriptions.

<a id="docs"></a>
##### Find module documentation
Once a module has been installed, we can view its documentation as follows,

`npm docs express`

<a id="bugs"></a>
##### View module bugs
We can also view the current documented bugs for a module using the following command,

`npm bugs express`

<a id="source"></a>
##### Edit module source
If we need to view the source code for a module, we can simply issue the following command

`npm edit express`

<a id="depend"></a>
##### Specifying dependencies
For node.js applications, we can ease their installation by specifying any required dependencies in an associated `package.json` file. This allows us as developers to simply specify the modules to install for our application, which can then be run using the following command

`npm install`

This helps reduce the need to install each module individually, and helps other users install an application as quickly as possible. Also, our application's dependencies are stored in one place.

An example `package.json` file might be as follows,

```
{
"name": "app" 
"version": "0.0.1"
"dependencies": {
  "underscore": "-1.2.1"
}
}
```
